I hope that you enjoy listening to this
podcast at least half as much as we
enjoy making it because it's an absolute
pleasure for us it really is a gift and
just the fact that you tune in to listen
is something we deeply appreciate so I
hesitate to ask for anything else
however if you feel inspired to share it
with a friend to leave us a review to
share it with the world we would be so
grateful and it would help us make the
show just a little bit better every week
so thank you for sharing if you feel
inspired and now on to our show
LinkedIn presents
[Music]
the advice I give people is
think about forgiving someone
think about being forgiven
and think about something that you'd
like to do that you haven't done yet
because I can't stop time no one can
but I can slow time and I can correct
time
I'm Rufus Grissom and this is the next
big idea today an exploration of
medicine and the new human
[Music]
throughout history there have been a
surprising number of doctors who were
also great writers
for some of these Physicians writing was
apparently a diversion
William Carlos Williams for instance
used to scribble his tourist poems on
prescription pads between patient visits
for others time in the hospital seems to
have stimulated their imaginations
when Arthur Conan Doyle was in medical
school he had a professor who could walk
into a waiting room and diagnose people
just by looking at them
these uncanny powers of observation
inspired Conan Doyle's most famous
creation Sherlock Holmes
and then the doctors for whom writing
seems to be a form of thinking a way to
process the lives they lead when they're
wearing white coats
in this Camp I'd include someone like
Oliver Sacks who wrote about his
patients not only as a way to make sense
of their pathologies but also to expand
his reader's understanding of science
medicine and The Human Condition another
writer working in that vein is here with
me today
Siddhartha Mukherjee
I don't usually read out my guest
biographies but SIDS is just so
remarkable I I just can't resist born
and raised in Delhi he attended Stanford
for undergrad and then earned a PhD at
Oxford as a Rhodes scholar after that he
got his MD at Harvard and in 2009 he
joined the oncology department at
Columbia where he teaches and manages a
lab that is developing new cancer drugs
on top of that if you can believe it
he's running four different biotech
companies
his only flaw as I learned when we
connected on Zoom is that he has a
chronic case of bed head though frankly
I think it's a good look as I alluded to
earlier Sid is not just a doctor he's
also a writer and a gifted one his first
book The Emperor of all maladies a
biography of cancer won a Pulitzer Prize
and was turned into a documentary by Ken
Burns
his next the Gene and intimate history
shot to the top of the New York Times
bestseller list and also received the
Ken Burns treatment
he's got a new book out now called the
song of the cell an exploration of
medicine and the new human
that song Or Story begins three and a
half billion years ago when the first
cells emerged it gained speed in the
17th 18th and 19th centuries as a
colorful cast of scientists and
hobbyists discovered that all living
things are made out of the same cellular
building blocks and it culminates in the
present as researchers sit among them
use their modern understanding of cells
to design game-changing treatments for
cancer and other diseases
oh you know what I completely forgot to
mention Sid also sings in a jazz fusion
band
[Music]
if you're wondering when does this guy
sleep well we talk about that in our
conversation which began a few minutes
late because Sid had to finish up a
phone call with a patient yes he still
treats patients which is a lovely
reminder I think of what ultimately
motivates his tireless work across so
many domains empathy curiosity passion
and she says a few times in our
conversation a commitment to relieving
suffering
as you're about to hear new Gene
therapies reprogramming the human cell
look like they're about to do that and
much much more
[Music]
[Applause]
Siddhartha Mukherjee welcome to the next
big idea podcast my pleasure thank you
for having me Sid your first book The
Emperor of all maladies was about the
quest to cure cancer and it won a
Pulitzer Prize congratulations thank you
your second the gene was a number one
bestseller and your latest the song of
the cell has spent 12 weeks on the New
York Times bestseller list I personally
find this really encouraging because
while your books are beautifully written
they're also full of dense complicated
science and very very long footnotes and
dense complicated science is not
something one typically Associates with
success in publishing why do you think
your work has resonated with such a
large audience
I think that it's resonated because
people are curious and people want to
know and bringing people into this what
you call a dense complicated world and
making it accessible making it
thoughtful making people understand what
ourselves how are we manipulating cells
what where is genetics going
this stuff is I think endlessly
interesting to people and I think we I
think as writers science writers but as
writers in general we have the we
foolishly underestimate how curious the
broader public is about sort of what's
Happening interesting and and I think
that's a terrible mistake I think we
that underestimation leads to All Sorts
you know it's like it's it's a kind of
paternalism which I cannot stand
I I'll tell you two anecdotes that are
important a very important mentor of
mine said to me that if you're let's say
you're doing research and and science
research and if you cannot explain to
someone who is curious and interested
in one sentence why what you're doing is
important for human beings you're in the
wrong profession
you should be able to explain in one
sentence that should be one exercise
that every scientist every doctor every
person involved in the Sciences is can
and should be able to do and I would
encourage if any science listeners are
out there here write that sentence down
because you'll need that sentence in
life because that'll sustain you for for
your entire lifetime so that's one
and then point number two is someone
else said to me that we underestimate
the interest people have in bringing
them to a completely new Cosmos
think of Alice in Wonderland think of
Tolkien think of Dune think of Hunger
Games think of you know
what people want to do I think as
readers
they want they really want to enter new
Cosmos with you a new world
they want to know the rules of the world
they want to be in that world and once
you brought them into the world they'll
trust you they'll say okay I'm in your
word with you in my in my case it
happens to be genetics it happens to be
cell biology it happens to be cancer it
happens to be longevity it happens to be
you know the latest things we're doing
or the latest trials we're doing but the
idea is that there's an endless appetite
for this Cosmos of new things because
it's interesting
you know who isn't interested in
entering Alice in Wonderland you know as
a child so the my my general thought
about this is don't underestimate
readers don't like don't paternalize
them yeah bring them into it and and
they'll come with you
there are passages in the book in which
you really describe the mystery of the
cell very much as if one is entering a
cosmos you talk about it as a spaceship
and talk about entering a cell and what
you would see and what that you know you
you certainly convey that effectively
and and do you think you talk a little
bit about the distrust that the public
has uh in science in recent years is
sort of an anti-science strain and do
you think that that that this sense of
paternalism of a kind of condescension
of scientists to lay people is perhaps
part of that I imagine another part of
it is the back and forth the uncertainty
of the scientific process which is part
of the process people are pretty
comfortable with uncertainty it's not
like people are sitting there saying
scientists have got to be certain
they're generally forgiving you know I
come back to the famous saying
attributed to Keynes John Mayer Keynes
who said
when facts change I change my mind what
do you do yeah I love that yeah it's a
very important quote because it can it
conveys both the humility of Science in
his case economic sciences and certain
Sciences
but also it conveys the idea that it's
an iterative process because facts
change
a new viral strain emerges and all of a
sudden everything you knew about viruses
changes a new way of thinking about the
universe comes about and all of a sudden
you know you have to throw your old
ideas out of the window now that doesn't
mean and this is very very important
Rufus
facts change conclusions change
but there are two things that don't
change
number one is that the scientific
process the process by which we evaluate
evidence doesn't change in other words
when new facts come about they go
through the same kind of evaluative
process that process has been refined
for nearly five centuries some people
would say you know maybe longer maybe
you know 2 000 years
since the Indians and Egyptians and the
Chinese and and you know various other
civilizations began to interrogate the
natural world okay so the process hasn't
changed
and the standards of proof have not
changed if anything they've improved
facts change theories change laws change
the universe changes new viral strains
emerge vaccinations change but the
process by which a
truth becomes a truth has not changed
and has not changed for the last several
hundred years and and the process hasn't
changed in part because it's been proven
to work right
it works and really well well Sid you're
doing a lot of a lot of different things
in parallel you're running a cancer
research lab you're a professor of
medicine at Columbia you're practicing
oncologists and you write for both
scientific journals and popular
magazines and you write these
best-selling books and as I understand
it you also perform with it with the
jazz fusion band uh so
I'm I'm curious to know first of all
whether you get enough sleep when do you
sleep how do you how do you manage to do
all these things in parallel some of us
could use some coaching as to how how to
be this uh you know um
I have terrible sleep I wake up in the
middle of the night with ideas and I
write them down oh yes I have this
problem and you commented on my my
general appearance which looks as if
I've climbed out of bed and walked into
into a scientific meeting or a studio
and I've just I've just let it go at
this point of time you know if that's
what it takes that's what it takes
whatever
so that's that and and yes I do sleep I
sleep a lot on flights because I'm
traveling and what what else can I say I
don't have the greatest sleep in the
world but
um I'm stuck with that and you know uh I
I wish I wish other people had better
sleep than I did well I'm I'm sorry to
hear that we had we had a great podcast
conversation with Dr Russell Foster on
this topic but I think for all of us
sleep sleep is a is a challenge to some
degree well I have sleep advice if you
ever want to sleep now I can give you
more sleep advice than probably anyone
else that's been on your show yeah yeah
turn into the story of the cell you you
say in the song of the cell every time
you look at a microscope you relive the
thrill of looking at your first cell uh
and you describe that Friday afternoon
in 1993 when you peered into your
microscope and saw a massive
kidney-shaped T cells that possess what
you describe as an inner glow and
luminous fullness the signs of healthy
active cells you say like eyes looking
back at you so there's there's a kind of
reverence right for for sort of the the
magic of the cell and and I I realized
reading your book that I didn't pay
enough attention in Biology class
apparently because there's a lot a lot
of a lot of new information there for me
that to me it's astonishing that the
cells in plants and animals are so
similar these are these units of life
that are Universal and they each have
this incredibly sophisticated set of
processes right of organs or organelles
do cells feel miraculous to you
yeah they feel miraculous to me but you
know I always think about the idea that
you know there are three
big laws that run through biology and
it's very important to know those three
big laws the first is the theory of
evolution
and now we know so much about it and it
it runs through the entire Animal
Kingdom and explains so much about the
diversity the forms the molecular
Revolution the you know everything we
know about life so much that we know
about life so that's one
the second is the universality of the
genetic code so genes as units of
information
genes encoded in particular ways and the
fact that basically speaking give or
take
right from bacteria to archae to humans
to elephants to blue whales to
whatever animal Loris is that you want
to think about
there's a genetic code that's running
through them and what's amazing about it
is that give or take with certain
differences the code can be transferred
from one to the other
as I said there's some differences but
give or take that's it's a universal
code
astonishing idea
and the third is cell biology is that
all these creatures large and small all
living creatures are made out of either
single cells or accumulations of single
cells so cell theory
three huge laws that are running through
the world of living beings
now there are a thousand books in
evolution a thousand books on genetics
including my own the Gene and intimate
history
but there's been really no I would say
big book on the cell
it's sort of like the cell got jipped
um and I wanted to correct that I wanted
to make sure that it was restored to its
appropriate
lawfulness
in the universe of life and the universe
of our understanding of life
and you know you come back to the idea
of miraculous yes it's miraculous but
it's a consequence of the other few
things it's a consequence of evolution
it's a consequence of
three odd billion years of the existence
of life it's a consequence of genes
being information that's then translated
and and enlivened by cells so yes it's
miraculous in some ways but it's not
miraculous in the way we think about you
know it's not a Divine miracle
it's a it's an evolutionary yeah sure
yeah it's a miracle of of how how life
emerges and
you know scientists may not be able to
tell you
the exact date you know January 16th 3
billion BC
that life emerges but we can tell you
the broad outlines of what we think is
the development of Life the development
of complex life the development of
multicellular life the development of
organs organelles etc etc in Broad terms
and you can say that's a miracle you can
say that science but it is what it is
yeah yeah yeah it is extraordinary to me
that that our planet has been around for
some what four billion years and not
long after the planet first came
together we had early beginnings of life
we had single-celled organisms then
there's this question of how the first
multicellular organisms evolved and I
was fascinated by your description of
this evolutionary biologist Lynn
margulis's case she made in 1967 I think
that complex organisms may have evolved
and I'm quoting here not by standard
natural selection but by an orgy of
cooperation in which cells engage so
closely together that they got inside
each other so you had two separate
single-celled organisms potentially you
know converging and for for people who
like to think about all living things
being sort of connected in some fashion
and we know we have billions of bacteria
in our gut and that we are ourselves
individually really a a kind of a
collaboration of organisms
this notion that the first multicellular
organisms may have been actually
separate organisms joining forces that's
I find that kind of amazing it is
amazing and you know this is uh work
done by Lynn margulis
way back when
um
60s 70s and she was sort of laughed off
the off the stage but now we know that
that's uh true inside our cells inside
human cells and this is maybe
astonishing to some
are organelles such as mitochondria
which generate energy and the
mitochondria as far as we can tell
either are really
bacterial cells or cells that are
similar to bacterial cells that are
ancient primitive cells swallowed and
entered into a symbiotic relationship
with and over time it turned out that
that was that had an evolutionary
advantage and that's how we ended up
having you know our complex cells it's a
beautiful idea it's an important idea
there's a lot of evidence for it
molecular genetic and other evidence for
it but um
it's not only I mean just to press the
idea home it's not only that we are you
know because we have so many bacterial
cells on our skin and inside our
intestines
we're not only assemblages of cells in a
macroscopic sense
we're also assemblages of cells in the
microscopic sense in other words our
cells are really assemblages of some
ancient cell that swallowed a bacterial
cell
that then found that it wasn't it was
off advantage to to do that and that's
how we evolved
it's so extraordinary and it's it's
equally extraordinary to to learn about
this multi-generational multi-century
process of of figuring all this out and
you clearly in the song of the cell have
a great admiration for the early
scientists and and tinkerers who back in
the 17th and 18th and 19th centuries
were making all sorts of remarkable
discoveries about the functions of cells
in the body uh and I think during the
pandemic lockdown you actually built
your own replica of an early microscope
in case in case any listeners didn't
think you were geeky enough to begin
with uh oh
um I'm as geeky as they come and I I'm
I'm proud of it leaky and proud
uh it sounds remarkable uh if you had a
a time machine and could travel back to
talk to one of those protobiologists
whose discoveries help shape the future
of medicine who who would you want to
visit and and what kind of conversation
would you want to have with them
do you mean a contemporary
protobiologist or a contemporary cell
biologist or or what do you what's no I
mean I mean if you could go I mean you
describe in the song of the cell all
these extraordinary early early
scientists who made these these you know
extraordinary early discoveries and I
I'm always finding myself wanting to
thinking like how much fun Darwin would
have reading your book today right right
I mean some of these early scientists
would just be wide-eyed and GAP jawed
to learn what has happened since then
this is a lovely idea by the way on a
side note the idea of Darwin reading my
book is makes me very very happy you
could get a maybe a blurb from Darwin I
can get a blurb from Darwin exactly Dear
Mr Darwin I've written a book about how
important your theory has been to my
life and to to the planet in general
would you be would you be kind enough to
say that this book this book reads well
anyway keep going
yeah so so I guess I guess I'm curious
about among you you know what are the
things you do in the song of the cell is
you bring to life dozens and dozens and
dozens of of early scientists and
Tinkers who made these critical
discoveries and they and they built on
one another incrementally and I I guess
maybe the question is who who among them
were you most kind of enamored with
fascinated by well I'll give you some
examples but they're all they're all so
crazy they're they're like such
crackpots that that would be interesting
to meet all of them but I'll give you a
couple
um yeah there's there's Robert Hook he's
he's a cantankerous guy he's a bit of a
polymath I don't know if he has a jazz
band but he probably would if he could
um but he you know he is a uh
microscopist a physicist an architect a
designer an illustrator an engineer a
tinkerer uh etc etc etc so Robert Hook
would be a fun character to visit partly
because he was such a cantankerous
magman at one point of time he he said
that he it was he who thought about the
laws of gravitation
and this made Newton so angry
that The Story Goes that when when the
Royal Society
moved its offices from its old office to
its new office so Robert Hooke used to
be the president of the Royal Society
and then Newton was the next president
that Newton was so pissed that he took
the one portrait of Robert Hooke that
ever existed in the world and he
purposefully neglected to move it to the
new office
and that portrait has been lost and so
the man who invented or partially
invented Optics the art of seeing
does not have an optical visual
representation of him we don't know what
he looked like you don't know what
Roberts look like but there are others
you know this crazy Lewin hook the the
inventor of the microscope you know he's
as crazy as they come he's not a
scientist he refuses to let other people
examine his microscopes he's living in
delft he's a cloth Trader never trained
in science we're fun to meet him and say
you know why didn't you just let you
know someone from the Royal Society look
down your microscope like what was with
you yeah and he did these beautiful
drawings that didn't have what he saw
beautiful drawing and the last person
I'll say is you know someone like
Francis Kelsey
um an administrator in the um at the FDA
who said who looked at the evidence and
said tholidomide was not safe for
pregnant women
I'd love to meet Francis Kelsey and just
shake her hand and say you know what you
did a great service and thank you
because everyone you know you were
pushed by drug companies you were pushed
by the FDA and you said you know thank
you but no thank you because I I have my
standards I'm not going to bend
I'm gonna have my own standards you have
to prove to me that this drug is safe
and I'm not sure that it is and saved
hundreds of thousands of lives so it's a
range all the way back from Robert Hooke
to Francis Kelsey
though I have not built my own
microscope I did purchase a microscope
on Amazon while reading your book uh
which I discovered for a few hundred
dollars you can get a like what appears
to be a professional microscope
it's actually kind of very powerful
right and and this but because this
description of a drop of rain water uh
when first viewed through the first
decent microscopes suddenly revealing
hundreds of undulating organisms so this
this you know this world just burst into
view and what a revelation that was
[Music]
moving into the present let's talk a
little bit about stem cells they've been
a buzzword in medicine for the last
several years and a source of some
political controversy but now we have
new techniques and there's a real
explosion of of new uh exciting
applications of those stem cells is that
right there's a special kind of stem
cell called an embryonic stem cell
this is a cell that you can grow and
makes copies of itself so you can grow
it in a lab in in culture like you can
grow any other cell type
but under the right circumstances you
can make that stem cell give rise to
all the necessary tissues that are in
the human body
so cartilage bone blood most tissues you
can derive from stem cells I should say
blood is an exception but that's a side
story so
these are extraordinary cells they're
derived from embryos and they have
extraordinary capacity to give rise to
other cells and for a while people
thought that there was a moral there was
a moral outrage about the fact that
these cells were being derived from
embryos
and therefore were in the gray zone for
some people
who thought that they should not be used
in laboratory research because in
principle number one they were derived
from embryos and number two they could
in principle give rise to embryos so
they should not be used for biological
research in a series of astonishing
experiments
Japanese researcher shinya yamanaka and
some others
I will name all the names but some
others discovered that you can actually
bypass
um deriving these cells from an embryo
and use any cell in the body a skin cell
a cell from anywhere else in the body
and make them into cells that are like
these embryonic stem cells
they are called IPS cells induced
pluripotent stem cells you don't need to
know why they call that but they behave
for the most part like embryonic stem
cells and by genetically manipulating
these these skin cells you can make them
behave like embryonics themselves it's
almost as if you took a cell from your
body
you know a cell from your skin and made
it into one of these embryonic cells
thereby bypassing some of these
religious and other concerns that these
cells were derived from embryos and
could give rise to embryos
it seems like the potential implications
of this and the the range of diseases
that could be treated are almost endless
is that right
um absolutely there's a there's an
there's enormous potential it's I would
say still in process
so it's unrealized potential but that's
how science works right so you you've
Advanced an idea it seems mad to start
with and then slowly it seems less and
less mad and then finally all of a
sudden you know you're taking a gene
therapy a chemical therapy a medicine
that seemed mad 10 years ago so this is
how science works and that's what makes
the pace of it blistering
and that's why people are interested in
it because I don't know someone in the
world with sickle cell anemia wants to
know what's the latest
and very very soon not far from the in
the future
we will have cures for sickle cell
anemia based on all these Technologies
based on this technology that that I
just described making stem cells and
progenitor cells out of your own cells
and others other kinds of Technologies
so it's more exciting than flying cars
these are cures for deadly diseases that
humans have had for since the birth of
humanity and it's extremely exciting
it's on par with the the most exciting
technologies that you can think about
and I often say you know right now
people ask me you know what's the most
exciting technology I can think about
and I think say
there are two it's what I call General
artificial intelligence
and
cell therapy for
various diseases those are I would say
the the two most exciting Arenas of
Technology it's not electric cars it's
not self-driving Vehicles all those are
interesting to me I would add one a
third to that and the third one would be
mitigation of climate change
um yeah whatever that might be but those
are three things that I find when I'm
reading you know a scientific journal it
sends Goosebumps up of my spine as you
say this is not hypothetical I mean some
you know there's there's certainly some
treatments that could become possible at
some time in the future but you you say
in the book as I write there are two
companies making stem cells that can
turn into pancreatic cells right the the
Mayo Clinic is working on a
bioartificial liver there are folks
working on a bio artificial heart this
is happening now do you see cancer as as
curable I see some cancers as as curable
in the short run
I see some cancers as preventable in the
short and long run
and I see cancer some cancers as
detectable in the short and long run
I think the solution to cancer is going
to be a mix
we'll prevent some we'll detect some
early and cut them out and some will
treat based on new Therapeutics breast
cancer is a good example
in breast cancer we're getting there so
there is preventative stuff in breast
cancer we know some of the risk factors
some genetics some non-genetic we can
identify people who are at high risk and
we can tell them what to do
um in order to help prevent breast
cancer
we can do early detection it helps a
little bit
and finally if you were to have breast
cancer we have now not one not two not
three not four not five but tens of
medicines that work for some variance a
majority of the variance of breast
cancer that will extend your life not
one not two not five but up to ten years
up to 15 years with breast cancer
so
we do have paradigms
life-changing life-shifting paradigms
for cancers
they're just not there for every Cancer
the subtitle of your book said is
provocative and exploration of medicine
and the new human and you say that
future humans will I'm quoting you here
be rebuilt Anew with modified cells and
these new humans will look and feel
mostly like you and me so presumably
they'll look and feel a little bit
better
than how how do you think of the about
the new human
well the subtitle of book is
purposefully provocative
I wanted to get away from this idea of
the new human as kind of a robotic sort
of blue pill swallowing
Keanu Reeves creature in a black MooMoo
um
I wanted to get to the idea that we're
already there and sometimes that's
interesting because people think about
the future as if we're not there yeah
but sometimes it's important to remind
people that we've already crossed
thresholds that have put us already
there
and that's why the I I bring up the idea
of the new human and the new human is
to me someone who where we're
manipulating cells and genes
it's someone
um who might have an organ that we've
built out of cells that we manipulated
it might be someone in whom we've
inserted
electrodes to stimulate brain circuits
so that they're not depressed
but most importantly the new human to me
is not and this is very important to me
as a physician and as a scientist is not
someone that we're trying to augment
but it's someone who we're trying to
heal
and that distinction remains extremely
important for me
I'm not interested in augmenting humans
I'm interested in healing humans there
might be other people
augmenting humans making them I don't
know taller smarter I'm not there I am
interested in healing humans who have
sickness healing humans who are
vulnerable healing humans who have
debilitating illnesses
through cell and Gene and
other therapies that human being is much
more interesting to me is a much more
empathetic way to think about new humans
than this kind of enhancement augmented
robotic blue pill swallowing creature
that exists in science fiction I'm not
interested
um other people are I'm fine with it
great
I'm I'm a doctor I like healing people
I'm interested in healing people I'm
interested in other people healing
people
I'm interested when those people come
alive from the dead
and when they come alive from the dead
because of Jane and cell therapies
because of things we went invented
they're new humans to me don't you think
though that in practice
the distinction between healing and
augmenting
is going to get blurry right I mean
that's already you know it's already
blurry right right I mean we think about
you know cures for Alzheimer's might
have the effect of enhancing memory
um or we may be able to prolong life by
turning back the clock of cells which
could also have the effect of extending
the lifespan of ordinary people I mean
it seems to me that there's a pattern
which is
anything to to new is is is frightening
at first but gradually incrementally we
become more comfortable with uh forms of
progress that extend the human lifespan
but it seems that in the coming decades
we're likely to have some real decisions
as a as a species about how much
augmentation we think is okay the lines
are blurring I have some strong lines
about it and I can talk to you about
them you know I think the strong lines
are
I think suffering is important
and pinning ourselves to to relieving
suffering as opposed to augmenting
humans is important
I think that the second piece of the
triangle is scientific proof uncertainty
so that we don't enter into areas that
are murky scientifically unproven
and that there is standards we talked
about proof and standards that those are
met
and the third area of the triangle is
humanistic
consent Freedom choice
the absence of pressure the presence of
full information
I think if we stay within the boundaries
of these triangles
I think we're okay
if we stray outside these boundaries
and try to augment ourselves outside
these this triangle I think we get into
trouble
and that's where we enter debates that
are
beyond what Physicians and scientists
can engage in and have to be entered
through
you know legal philosophical
humanistic and other ideas that are
outside my limited purview of the word
from a scientific perspective you know
there's been a lot of a lot of talk
recently about extending the human
lifespan from a scientific perspective
it seems that that is not impossible
that this this obsolescence of of cells
is potentially modifiable is that sound
right
it sounds right and it's probably right
to be totally honest
um let me give you some practical
considerations and then some
philosophical considerations
the Practical considerations are that if
you think about this again if you think
about standards and proof
these are very very difficult trials to
run
running a trial
for the extension of life is not an easy
study as you can imagine right
I'll just walk you through it how do you
do it you you put two groups together
one gets a treatment and the other
doesn't get a treatment and then you
wait for what 15 years until you figure
out whether the the first group is is
living longer than the other right that
would be strong randomized blinded
scientific proof that you've extended
life
name a single
company or investor that's willing to
invest 15-year trial
such that they can extend life in a
scientifically validated way
so that the proof is bad
okay name one
so that's that's the Practical end of
things now I'm going to talk about the
philosophical piece of it
philosophically speaking as I said my
interest and I suspect an interest of a
lot of people is in suffering yeah if
you were to tell me that the Aged which
is true and this would be a true fact
the Aged are suffering from
bone loss
frequent Falls
and breaking bones and dying because of
that and
having pain and suffering I could say I
could solve that problem using whatever
mechanisms I have
if you say they have loss of memory they
have loss of autonomy they have lots of
agency their brains are not working I
could say well okay I can look into that
I'm not the person I don't work on this
but I could look into that
if you say to me the age of us suffering
because they are not living long enough
is that suffering you're suffering
because you're not living long enough
it's pretty vague for me and I would say
in my list of things to do in life and I
have a limited number of things I can do
aside from
being in jazz bands um I would say
not that interested some other people
might be for me no
on the subject of jazz bands the name of
the book is the song of the cell
and you talk
towards the end of the book about the
sort of New Frontier of understanding
not only the mechanisms of how cells
behave which we understand pretty well
but the macro mechanisms through which
cells are citizens of the body and
collaborate on ever larger scales do you
feel it when you're playing in your jazz
fusion band do you feel a connection
between music and the functioning of our
bodies uh and and is that uh can you
tell us more about your choice for the
title of the book The Song of the cell
so the two separate questions there
number one is that it's not a hidden
secret that there is a connection
between music and Science and perhaps a
connection between music and Mathematics
and Science yeah when no one's explored
it systematically my intuition and I
might be wrong my intuition is that it's
not a coincidence the parts of the brain
that have to do with one have to do with
the other
sometimes they are all manifest together
sometimes they're not but I don't think
it's a coincidence I may be wrong I'm
happy to be proven wrong I'd love to see
some some real data on this as I said
I'm interested in standards and proof
but I uh my intuition is it's not a
coincidence
so that's answer to question number one
question number two is why is it called
the song the song of the cell
well because they're two songs
number one is that the cell plays out
the song of The genome
think about jazz
you give a piece to Miles Davis
and Miles Davis plays it out a certain
way
um you give the same piece to Ella and
she sings it out a certain way you give
the same piece to
Vijay Iyer he plays it on a certain
other way it's the same score
and that's the same story with cells you
know your brain cells your neurons your
blood cells the T cells
the kidney cells in your body have the
same score
but like Ella and Vijay and
miles and
Thelonious and whoever else they're
playing it out in different ways
it's the same score
but the song that comes out is
completely different so that's one song
on the cell
and then there's a second song of the
cell and that is
going to continue this analogy and
pardon me if it gets a little convoluted
Thelonious plays a piece of music and
then he runs
you know walks into you know 134th
Street
and meets Ella and
they say to each other you know
that was very interesting the way you
played that piece
but I don't understand it I don't
understand how you took that same thing
and you played it let's let's get
together and figure out how you played
it and how I played it how they're
different how we talk to each other how
we communicate with each other
that conversation
I think is still missing we don't know
it we can't hear it
and I'd love to hear it
that conversation between individual
cells who are playing out different
songs
But ultimately are creating the body of
music
is a song that we still don't know and
I'll give you the simplest example to
end
Stephen Padgett the English surgeon said
in the 19th century said
the liver and spleen are two organs they
sit next to each other one to the left
one to the right they're about the same
size
they have about the same flux of blood
in them the liver is among the most
frequent sites of cancer and metastases
the spleen is among the least frequent
sites of cancer metastases
why
we still don't know the answer to the
question and that has to do with the
fact that cancer cells can sing their
song out in the liver but they can't
sing their song out in the spleen why
I don't know no one knows the answers
are going to be fascinating and
interesting and that's where we're going
[Music]
hey folks I'm interrupting this episode
to share some exciting news we just
launched a new podcast it's called the
next big idea daily and it's hosted by
my colleague and dear friend Michael
kavnot who's here with me now Michael do
you want to tell us a little bit about
the show
I sure do Rufus you know as a co-founder
of the next big idea Club I get to talk
to some of the smartest non-fiction
writers working today people with big
ideas about creativity productivity
parenting relationships decision making
leadership I mean these are people who
write big books full of media ideas
books that we all want to read but come
on I mean who has the time I don't have
the Time Michael they're just there's so
many of these books and they're so good
exactly so the way we're going to solve
this problem is on this podcast this new
podcast the next big idea daily we're
going to serve up these authors Big
Ideas in short daily nuggets in just
minutes listeners will get a quick
master class in better smarter living
from thinkers like Adam Grant Kim Scott
Daniel pink and lots of other writers
with life-changing ideas
I love that these are just 10 to 15
minutes a day that's like perfect for
sipping my morning coffee that I've been
loving this week's episodes with Daniel
Coyle I've already learned a lot if
listeners want to check them out what
should they do just follow the next big
idea daily on Apple podcasts Spotify or
wherever you listen to podcasts
well I said you opened the book with a
story of your friend Sam who was
diagnosed with a malignant melanoma in
2016.
and initially he responded well to
treatment he went into remission but the
cancer came back and ultimately
tragically as as you write the melanoma
one
do you think that do you think that we
today would have a better chance at at
fighting that cancer or do you think
that 10 or 15 or 20 years from now we
might have been able to
have a different outcome
well I think today we'd have a better
outcome I think that there are
a series of new drugs since that time
since
2016 and 2017
that allow us to have much much more
control
on cancer and I think that maybe this
time we would have won but
that's just a hope
yeah yeah well boy it sure creates
a kind of urgency around around the work
and you that you and many others are
doing it's uh it's pretty extraordinary
I I I I was I was really moved by um
your passage where you said the last
time you saw Sam he asked you what
happens at the end
and you thought back to all the patients
you'd been with near the end of their
lives and you you gave him some advice
I wonder if you could share that with us
I mean the advice I give people is
think about forgiving someone
think about being forgiven
and think about something that you'd
like to do that you haven't done yet
because I can't stop time no one can
but I can slow time and I can correct
time
and by correct time I mean
when people die and I see this every day
you know it's part of my practice
I say to people what's
what's hankering you
and the answer is
often
that they haven't told someone that they
love them
they haven't forgiven someone
and they haven't been forgiven by
someone just three simple things
and I say okay yeah there's a phone next
to you pick up the phone
and say to someone that you haven't
forgiven just say I forgive you
or pick up the phone and say to someone
I'm really sorry I did something
can you please forgive me
and pick up the phone and say to someone
I love you
and
that's okay
there is a
spiritual burden that's lifted from you
when you say those three things
and you make yourself ready to die
it's readying yourselves you know you
can crash a plane you can land a plane I
want people to land the plane
and it's it's good advice for those of
us who who are not yet at the end as
well uh it's uh
very moving uh but we'll see we're we're
both parents I have three sons I think
you have two daughters
um and I think it's pretty common for
parents to have mixed feelings these
days about the world we're living our
children as you mentioned earlier the
climate is in peril
you know democracy is under siege but
boy it feels reading your book it feels
like medicine is kind of a silver lining
that there's uh that this is a really
hopeful part of of of of the story of
where we're headed do you feel that way
I'm optimistic
I think we'll solve these problems we
just have to resolve ourselves to it
well Sid thank you uh for taking time
out of your jazz band and you're seeing
your patience and yes Ben has figured
all too much
your microscope building and all of your
activities to be with us today we we so
appreciate it by the way I would love to
uh I don't know if you guys ever play in
the city but I'd love to come here yeah
we didn't see it all the time
um we're a big National sawdust people
we are met people we play in the city
God come come join us
that was Sid Mukherjee the author most
recently of the song of the cell which
is available wherever books are sold
if you enjoyed this episode you might
also like the conversation I had on this
show with Walter Isaacson about crispr
Gene editing technology Walter's just
amazing I think you'll love it you can
find a link in the show notes do you
have thoughts about this episode I'd
love to hear them message me Rufus
griskum on LinkedIn and while you're
there sign up for our newsletter where
you can get a behind the scenes look at
these episodes and discuss the series
with other listeners if you want to
subscribe there's a link in the episode
notes Today's show was written and
produced by Caleb bissinger sound
designed by Mike Toda are collaborators
at the LinkedIn podcast Network whereas
many different hats as Sid does I'm
Rufus Grissom see you next week
[Music]